LIME user manual
================

Introduction
------------

Disclaimer
~~~~~~~~~~

We, the authors and maintainers of LIME, do not
guarantee that results given by LIME are correct, nor can we be held
responsible for erroneous results. We do not claim that LIME
is perfect or free of bugs and therefore the user should always take
utmost care when drawing scientific conclusions based on results
obtained with LIME. It is very important that the user performs tests
and sanity checks whenever working with the LIME code to make sure that
the results are reasonable and reliable. In particular, care needs to be
taken when extending the runtime parameters into regimes for which the
code was not designed.


The LIME code
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

LIME (Line Modeling Engine) is an excitation and radiation transfer
code that can be used to predict line and continuum radiation from an
astronomical source model. The code uses unstructured 3D Delaunay
grids for photon transport and accelerated Lambda Iteration for
population calculations.

LIME was developed for the purpose of predicting the emission signature
of low-mass young stellar objects, including molecular envelopes and
protoplanetary disks. In principle the method should work for similar
environments such as (giant) molecular clouds, atmospheres around
evolved stars, high mass stars, molecular outflows, etc. As opposed to
most other line radiation transfer codes which are constrained by
cylindrical or spherical symmetry, LIME, being a 3D code, does not impose any such
geometrical constraints. The main
limitation therefore to what can be done with LIME is the availability of input
models.

LIME is distributed under a Gnu General Public License.

Any publication that contains results obtained with the LIME code should cite the publication
Brinch & Hogerheijde, A&A, 523, A25, 2010.

Development history
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The initial LIME code was written by Christian Brinch
between 2006 and 2010, with version 1.0 appearing in early 2010. LIME
derives from the radiation transfer code RATRAN developed by
Michiel R.  Hogerheijde and Floris van der Tak (Hogerhijde & van der
Tak, 2000), although after several rewrites, the shared codebase is
very small. The photon transport method is a direct implementation of
the SimpleX algorithm (Ritzerveld & Icke, 2006).

Subsequent to the creation of the package by Christian Brinch, contributors to LIME have included:

- Tuomas Lunttila
- Sébastien Maret
- Marco Padovani
- Anika Schmiedeke
- Ian Stewart
- Mathieu Westphal


Obtaining LIME
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The LIME code can be obtained from gitHub at `<https://github.com/lime-rt/lime>`_. The available files include the source code,
this documentation, and an example model. The documentation can be read on line at `<https://readthedocs.org/projects/lime/>`_.

Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~

LIME runs on any platform with an ANSI C compiler. Most modern operating
systems are equipped with the GNU gcc compiler, but if it is not already
present, it can be obtained from the GNU website (http://www.gnu.org).
Furthermore, LIME needs a number of libraries to be present, including
ncurses, GNU scientific Library (GSL), cfitsio, and qhull. Please refer
to the README file within the LimePackage for details on how to obtain
and install these libraries on various systems. Although it is not
strictly needed for LIME to run, it is useful to have some kind of
software that can process FITS files (IDL, CASA, MIRIAD, etc.) in order
to be able to extract science results from the model images.

There are no specific hardware requirements for LIME to run.
A fast computer is recommended (>2 GHz) with a reasonable amount of
memory (>1 GB), but less will do as well. LIME can be run in multi-threaded
(parallel) mode, if several CPUs are available. It is also possible to
run several instances of LIME simultaneously on a
multi-processor machine with enough memory.

Setting up LIME
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

LIME is compiled at run time, so there is no need to make any kind of
pre-installation of the code. The only requirement for the code to run
is that the path to `lime` script is in the PATH environment
variable.

.. note::

   Starting with LIME 1.5, sourcing the `sourceme.bash` or
   `sourceme.bash` (depending on your SHELL type) is not needed
   anymore.

Running LIME
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the PATH variable is set, LIME can be run from the command
line

::

    bash$ lime model.c

where model.c is the file containing the model (this file can have any
name). This will cause the code to be compiled and the terminal window
should change and display the progress of the calculations. After
completion, the user is prompted to press a key which will bring the
terminal window back. It is possible to run LIME in silent mode, that
is, without any output in the terminal window. This is done by setting
the silent flag to 1 (the default setting is 0) in the file
LimePackage/src/lime.h. LIME also accepts several
:ref:`command line options <lime-options>`.

The inner workings of LIME
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The first thing that happens after compilation is that LIME allocates
memory for the grid and the molecular data based on the parameter
settings in the model file. All user defined settings are checked for
sanity and in case there are inconsistencies, LIME will abort with an
error message. It then goes on to generate the grid (unless a predefined
grid is provided) by picking and evaluating random points until enough
points have been chosen to form the grid. The grid is then iteratively
smoothed to avoid oddly-shaped Delaunay triangles.
Because the grid needs to be re-triangulated at each iteration, the
smoothing process may take a while. After smoothing, a number of grid
properties (e.g. velocity splines) are pre-calculated for later use, and
the grid is written to file.

When the grid is ready, LIME decides whether to calculate populations or
not, depending on the user's choice of output images and LTE options (see
chapter 2). If one or more non-LTE line images are asked for, LIME will
proceed to calculate the level populations. This too is an iterative
process where the radiation field and the populations are recalculated
repeatedly. The radiation field is obtained by propagating photons
through the grid, a fix number for each grid point, and using the
resulting radiation field, the code enters a minor iteration loop where
a set of linear equations, determining the statistical equilibrium, are
iterated upon in order to converge upon a set of populations. This is
done for each grid point in turn. Once all the grid points has gotten
new populations, the process is repeated.

When the solution has converged, the code will ray-trace the model to
obtain an image. Ray-tracing is done for each user- defined image in
turn. At the end of the ray-tracing, FITS files will be written to the
disk at the code will clean up the memory and terminate.

.. _lime-options:

Command line options
--------------------

.. note::

   Starting with LIME 1.5, command line options can be used to change
   LIME default behavior without editing the source code.

LIME accepts several command line options:

.. option:: -V

   Display version information

.. option:: -h

   Display help message

.. option:: -f

   Use fast exponential computation. When this option is set, LIME
   uses a lookup-table replacement for the exponential function, which
   however (due to cunning use of the properties of the function)
   returns a value with full floating-point precision, indeed with
   better precision than that for much of the range. Use of this
   option reduces the run time by 25%.

.. option:: -n

   Turn off `ncurses` messages. This is useful when running LIME in a
   non-interactive way.

.. option:: -p nthreads

   Run in parallel mode with `nthreads`. The default a single thread,
   i.e. serial execution.

.. note::

   The number of threads may also be set with the :ref:`par->nThreads <par-nthreads>`
   parameter.

Setting up models
-----------------

The model file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All basic setup of a model is done in a single file which we refer to as
model.c (although it may be given any name). Model.c is, as the name
suggests, C source code which is compiled together with LIME at runtime,
and therefore it must conform to the ansi C standard. Setting up a model
however, requires only little knowledge of the C programming language.
For an in- depth introduction to C the user is referred to “The C
Programming Language 2nd ed.” by Kernighan and Ritchie, and otherwise,
numerous tutorials and introductions can be found on the Internet. The
file lime\_cs.pdf, contained in the LimePackage directory, is a quick
reference for setting up models for LIME. Please not that all physical
numbers in model.c should be given in SI-units.

In most common cases, everything about a model should be described
within model.c. However, model.c can be set up as a wrapper that will
call other files containing parts of the model or even call external
codes or subroutines. Examples of such usage are given below in the
section Advanced setup.

model.c should always begin with the following inclusion

.. code:: c

    #include "lime.h"

to make model.c aware of the global LIME variable structures. Other
header files may be included in model.c if needed, with the possible
need of modifying the Makefile accordingly. Following the preprocessor
commands, the main model function should appear

.. code:: c

    void input(inputPars *, image *);

This function should contain the parameter and image settings.

Parameters
~~~~~~~~~~

A structure named "par" is defined in lime.h. This structure contains
all basic settings such as number of grid points, model radius, input
and output filenames, etc. Some of these parameters always need to be
set by the user, while others are optional with preset default values.
There is an exception to this rule, namely when restarting LIME with
previously calculated populations. In that case, none of the
non-optional parameters are required.

.. code:: c

    (double) par->radius (required)

This value sets the outer radius of the computational domain. It should
be set large enough to cover the entire spatial extend of the model. In
particular, if a cylindrical input model is used (e.g., the input file
for the RATRAN code) one should not use the radius of the cylinder but
rather the distance from the center to the corner of the (r,z)-plane.

.. code:: c

    (double) par->minScale (required)

minScale is the smallest scales sampled by the code. Structures smaller
than minScale will not be sampled properly. If one uses spherical
sampling (see below) this number can also be though upon as the inner
edge of the grid. This number should not be set smaller than needed,
because an undesirable large number of grid point will end up near the
center of the model.

.. code:: c

    (integer) par->pIntensity (required)

This number is the number of model grid points. The more grid points
that are used, the longer the code will take to run. Too few points
however, will cause the model to be under-sampled with the risk of
getting wrong results. Useful numbers are between a few thousands up to
about one hundred thousand.

.. code:: c

    (integer) par->sinkPoints (required)

The sinkPoints are grid points that are distributed randomly at
par->radius forming the surface of the model. As a photon from within
the model reaches a sink point it is said to escape and is not traced
any longer. The number of sink points is a user defined quantity since
the exact number may affect the resulting image as well as the running
time of the code. One should choose a number that gives a surface
density large enough not to cause artifacts in the image and low enough
not to slow down the gridding too much. Since this is model dependent, a
global best value cannot be given, but a useful range is between a few
thousands and about ten thousand.

.. code:: c

    (integer) par->sampling (optional)

The sampling parameter takes value 0, 1 or 2. sampling=0 is used for
uniform sampling in Log(radius) which is useful for models with a
central condensation (i.e., envelopes, disks), whereas sampling=1 is
uniform sampling in x, y, and z. The latter is useful for models with no
central condensation (molecular clouds, galaxies, slab geometries).

The value sampling=2 was added because the routine for 0 was found not to generate grid points with exact spherical rotational symmetry. The 2 setting implements this now properly; sampling=0 has, however, been retained for purposes of backward compatibility. In practice there is little obvious difference between the outputs from 0 versus 2.

The default value is now sampling=2.

.. code:: c

    (double) par->tcmb (optional)

This parameter is the temperature of the cosmic microwave background.
This parameter defaults to 2.725K which is the value at zero redshift
(i.e., the solar neighborhood). One should make sure to set this
parameter properly when calculating models at a redshift larger than
zero: TCMB = 2.725(1+z) K. It should be noted that even though LIME can
now take the change in CMB temperature with increasing z into account,
it does not (yet) take cosmological effects into account when
ray-tracing (such as stretching of the frequencies when using Jansky as
unit). This is currently under development.

.. code:: c

    (string) par->moldatfile[i] (optional)

Path to the i’th molecular data file. Molecular data files contains the
energy states, Einstein coefficients, and collisional rates which are
needed by LIME to solve the excitation. These files need to conform to
the standard of the LAMDA database
(http://www.strw.leidenuniv.nl/~moldata). Data files can be downloaded
from the LAMDA database but from LIME version 1.23, LIME can also
download these files automatically. If a data file name is give that
cannot be found locally, LIME will try and download the file instead.
When downloading data files, the filename can be give both with and
without the surname .dat (i.e., “co” or “co.dat”). moldatfile is an
array so multiple data files can be used for a single LIME run. There is
no default value.

.. code:: c

    (string) par->dust (optional)

Path to a dust opacity table. This table should be a two column ascii
file with wavelength in the first column and opacity in the second
column. Currently LIME uses the same tables as RATRAN from Ossenkopf and
Henning (1994), and so the wavelength should be given in microns (1e-6
meters) and the opacity in cm2/g. This is the only place in LIME where
SI units are not used. The moldatfile and dust parameters are optional
in the sense that at least one of them (or both) should be set. There is
no default value. A future version of LIME will allow spatial variance
of the dust opacities, so that opacities can be given as function of x,
y, and z.

.. code:: c

    (string) par->outputfile (optional)

This is the file name of the output file that contains the level
populations. If this parameter is not set, LIME will not output the
populations. There is no default value.

.. code:: c

    (string) par->binoutputfile (optional)

This is the file name of the output file that contains the grid,
populations, and molecular data in binary format. This file is used to
restart LIME with previously calculated populations. Once the
populations have been calculated and the binoutputfile has been written,
LIME can re-ray-trace for a different set of image parameters without
re-calculating the populations. There is no default value.

.. code:: c

    (string) par->restart (optional)

This is the file name of a binoutputfile that will be used to restart
LIME. If this parameter is set, all other parameter statements (except
par->antialias; see below) will be ignored and can safely be left out of
the model file. There is no default value.

.. code:: c

    (string) par->gridfile (optional)

This is the file name of the output file that contains the grid. If this
parameter is not set, LIME will not output the grid. The grid file is
written out as a VTK file. This is a formatted ascii file that can be
read with a number of 3D visualizing tools (Visualization Tool Kit,
Paraview, and others). There is no default value.

.. code:: c

    (string) par->pregrid (optional)

A file containing an ascii table with predefined grid point positions.
If this option is used, LIME will not generate its own grid, but rather
use the grid defined in this file. The file needs to contain all
physical properties of the grid points, i.e., density, temperature,
abundance, velocity etc. There is no default value.

.. code:: c

    (integer) par->lte_only (optional)

If set, LIME performs an LTE calculation. Useful for quick checks. The
default lte\_only=0, i.e., full non-LTE calculation.

.. code:: c

    (integer) par->blend (optional)

If set, LIME takes line blending into account, however, only if there
are any overlapping lines among the transitions found in the
moldatfile(s). LIME will print a message on screen if it finds
overlapping lines. Switching line blending on will slow the code down
considerably, in particular if there is more than one molecular data
file. The default is blend=0 (no line blending).

.. code:: c

    (integer) par->antialias (optional)

If set, LIME will anti-alias the output image. anti-alias can take the
value of any positive integer, with the value 1 (default) being no
anti-aliasing. Greater values correspond to stronger anti-aliasing. LIME
uses stochastic super-sampling anti- aliasing. This is very effective in
minimizing artifacts in the image, but it also slows down the ray-tracer
by a factor equal to the value of antialias. This parameter is the only
one that will not be ignored in case par->restart is set.

.. code:: c

    (integer) par->polarization (optional)

If set, LIME will calculate the polarized continuum emission. This
parameter only has an effect if LIME is set up to do a continuum
calculation only. The resulting image cube will have three channels
containing the Stokes I, Q, and U. In order for the polarization to
work, a magnetic field needs to be defined (see below). When
polarization is switched on, LIME is identical to the DustPol code
(Padovani et al., 2012).

.. _par-nthreads:

.. code:: c

    (integer) par->nThreads (optional)

If set, LIME will perform the most time-consuming sections of its calculations in parallel, using the specified number of threads. Serial operation is the default.

Images
~~~~~~

LIME can output a number of images per run. The information about each
image is contained in a structure array called img. The images defined
in the image array can be either line or continuum images or both. All
definitions of an image may be changed between images (i.e., distance,
resolution, inclination, etc.) so that a number of images with varying
source distance or image resolution can be made in one go. In the
following, i should be replaced by the image number (0, 1, 2, ...)

.. code:: c

    (integer) img[i]->pxls (required)

This is the number of pixels per spatial dimensions of the FITS file.
The total amount of pixels in the image is thus the square of this
number.

.. code:: c

    (double) img[i]->imgres (required)

The image resolution or size of each pixel. This number is given in arc
seconds. The image field of view is therefore pxls x imgres.

.. code:: c

    (double) img[i]->theta (required)

Theta is the viewing angle (the angle between the model z axis and the
ray-tracers line of sight). This number is given in radians, not
degrees, so that a face-on view (of models where this term is
applicable) is 0 and edge-on view is π/2.

.. code:: c

    (double) img[i]->distance (required)

The source distance in meters. LIME knows the conversion between parsec,
AU, and meters, so the distance can be given as 100\*pc, for example. If
the source is located at a cosmological distance, this parameter is the
luminosity distance.

.. code:: c

    (integer) img[i]->unit (required)

The unit of the image. This variable can take values between 0 and 4. 0
for Kelvin, 1 for Jansky per pixel, 2 for SI units, and 3 for Solar
luminosity per pixel. The value 4 is a special option that will create
an optical depth image cube (dimensionless).

.. code:: c

    (string) img[i]->filename (required)

This variable is the name of the FITS file. It has no default value.

.. code:: c

    (double) img[i]->phi (optional)

Phi is an optional geometric parameter. Like theta, it should be given
in radians between 0 and 2π. Phi is the rotation angle of the model
(x,y)-plane around the z-axis. If the model is view face-on (so that the
line of sight coincides with the z-axis), phi corresponds to the
position angle on the sky. The default value is 0.

.. code:: c

    (double) img[i]->source_vel (optional)

The source velocity is an optional parameter that gives the spectra a
velocity offset. This parameter is useful when comparing the model to an
astronomical source with a known relative velocity.

.. code:: c

    (integer) img[i]->nchan (semi optional)

nchan is the number of velocity channels in a spectral image cube. See
the note below for additional information.

.. code:: c

    (double) img[i]->velres (semi optional)

The velocity resolution of the spectral dimension of the FITS file (the
width of a velocity channel). This number is given in m/s. See the note
below for additional information.

.. code:: c

    (integer) img[i]->trans (semi optional)

The transition number when ray-tracing line images. This number refers
to the transition number in the molecular data files. Contrary to the
numbers in the data files, trans is zero-index, meaning that the first
transition is labeled 0, the second transition 1, and so on. For linear
rotor molecules without fine structure transition in their data files
(CO, CS, HCN, etc.) the trans parameter is identified by the lower level
of the transition. For example, for CO J=1-0 the trans label would be
zero and for CO J=6-5 the trans label would be 5. For molecules with a
complex level configuration (e.g., H2O), the user needs to refer to the
datafile to find the correct label for a given transition. See the note
below for additional information.

.. code:: c

    (double) img[i]->freq (semi optional)

Center frequency of the spectral axis in Hz. This parameter can be used
for both line and continuum images. See the note below for additional
information.

.. code:: c

    (double) img[i]->bandwidth (semi optional)

With of the spectral axis in Hz. See the note below for additional
information.

Note on semi-optional image parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The above parameters listed as semi optional determine what kind of
image is produced (line or continuum). Only certain combinations are
permitted, however some of them have to be set. LIME decides to make a
continuum image if the parameter nchan is left unset. This will result
in a single channel continuum image. In nchan is unset, the only other
parameter which is allowed to be set is freq, which, however, has to be
set. In addition, the parameter par->dust needs to be set as well,
otherwise, LIME will produce an error. In order to produce a line image
cube, either the parameter nchan, velres, and trans or nchan, freq, and
bandwidth should be set. Any other combination will produce an error.
For line images, at least one moldatfile should be provided and
optionally a dust opacity table as well.

Model functions
---------------

The second part of the model.c file contains the actual model
description. This is provided as seven subroutines: density, molecular
abundance, temperature, systematic velocities, random velocities,
magnetic field, and gas-to-dust ratio. The user only needs to provide
the functions that are relevant to a particular model, e.g., for
continuum images only, the user need not include the abundance function
or any of the velocity functions. The magnetic field function needs only
be included for continuum polarization images.


.. figure:: images/fig_coords_big.png
   :alt: coordinates
   :width: 380
   :align: right
   :figwidth: 400

   The cartesian coordinate system used by LIME, showing the direction of the observer (red arrow) and the relation to the axes of the user-specifiable angles theta and phi.


Density
~~~~~~~

The density subroutine contains a user-defined description of the 3D
density profile of the collision partner(s).

.. code:: c

    void
    density(double x, double y, double z, double *density){
      density[0] = f(x,y,z);
      density[1] = f(x,y,z);
      ...
      density[n] = f(x,y,z);
    }

LIME can deal with an unlimited number of collision partners (n).
However, LIME will produce an error if more density profiles are given
in the density subroutine than there are collision partners listed in
the molecular data file. In most cases, a single density profile will
suffice. The density is a number density, that is, the number of
collision partners per unit volume (in cubic meters, not cubic
centimeters). Please note that the current version of LIME always takes
the abundance relative to the first collision partner. This is
potentially a problem if the first collision partner is not the total H2
density and the user will have to correct for this in the abundances
(see below).

Molecular abundance
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The abundance subroutine contains descriptions of the molecular
abundance profiles of the input model. The number of abundance profiles
should match exactly the number of molecular data files defined in
par->moldatfile.

.. code:: c

    void
    abundance(double x, double y, double z, double *abundance){
      abundance[0] = f(x,y,z);
      abundance[1] = f(x,y,z);
      ...
      abundance[n] = f(x,y,z);
    }

The abundance is the fractional abundance with respect to the primary
collision partner (density[0]) so that the molecular density of the
first species is given by abundance[0] x density[0]. The abundances are
dimensionless.

Temperature
~~~~~~~~~~~

The temperature subroutine contains the descriptions of the gas, and
optionally, the dust temperature.

.. code:: c

    void
    temperature(double x, double y, double z, double *temperature){
      temperature[0] = f(x,y,z);
      temperature[1] = f(x,y,z);
    }

The entry 0 in the temperature array is the kinetic gas temperature.
This value is required for LIME to run. The entry 1 is the optional dust
temperature. Both are in Kelvin. If there is no explicit dust
temperature given in the temperature subroutine, LIME will assume that
the dust temperature equals the gas temperature.

Random velocities
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This subroutine contains a scalar field which describes the velocity
dispersion of the random motions of the gas. This number is the Doppler
b-parameter which is the 1/e half-width of the line profile. The doppler
subroutines differs from the other model subroutines in the sense that
the return type is a scalar, and not an array. The doppler b-parameter
should be given in m/s.

.. code:: c

    void
    doppler(double x, double y, double z, double *doppler){
      *doppler = f(x,y,z);
    }

Because the return type is a scalar, the asterisk in front of the
variable name needs to be present. doppler[0] does not work.

Velocity field
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The velocity field subroutine contains the systematic velocity field of
the gas. The return type of this subroutine is a three component vector,
with components for the x, y, and z axis.

.. code:: c

    void
    velocity(double x, double y, double z, double *velocity){
      velocity[0] = f(x,y,z);
      velocity[1] = f(x,y,z);
      velocity[2] = f(x,y,z);
    }

In the current version of LIME, splines are calculated based on the
information in the velocity field function and therefore this function
is only called once. Hence, it need not be as optimized as in previous
versions of LIME. It is now feasible to use look-up tables for the
velocity field as well. LIME will use a forth-order polynomial to
approximate the line-of-sight velocity field component. In case the
par-pregrid option is set, LIME will use linear interpolation between
grid points.

Magnetic field
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The magnetic field subroutine contains a description of the magnetic
field. The return type of this subroutine is a three component vector,
with components for the x, y, and z axis. The magnetic field only has an
effect for continuum polarization calulations, that is, if
par->polarization is set.

.. code:: c

    void
    magfield(double x, double y, double z, double *B){
      B[0] = f(x,y,z);
      B[1] = f(x,y,z);
      B[2] = f(x,y,z);
    }

Gas-to-dust ratio
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Finally the gas-to-dust ratio is an optional function which the user can
choose to include in the model.c file. If this function is left out,
LIME defaults to a dust-to-gas ratio of 100 everywhere. This number only
has an effect if the continuum is included in the calculations.

.. code:: c

    void
    gasIIdust(double x, double y, double z, double *gtd){
      *gtd = f(x,y,z);
    }

Other settings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A number of additional settings can be found in the file
LimePackage/src/lime.h. These settings should in general not be changed
by the user, unless there is an explicit need to do so. A few of them
however, could be useful to some users. The keyword silent which is by
default set to zero can be set to one. This will cause LIME to run
completely silent with no output to the screen at all. This can be
useful for running LIME in batch mode in the background.

Another number that might be of interest is NITERATIONS, by default set
to 16. This is the number of major iteration loops LIME will go through
before ray-tracing. If the user is happy with the signal-to-noise
achieved after fewer iterations, this number can be lowered accordingly.
Obviously, a higher number will cause LIME to go through more
iterations, which may be needed for models with slow convergence.

Advanced setup
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Standard use of LIME requires the user to formulate the model in the
model functions described above as either an analytical expression or a
look-up table of values. As input models increase in complexity however,
analytical descriptions may no longer be possible and with model
dimensionality higher than one, look-up tables become difficult to
manage within the model.c functions. In the following we will explain
how to use complex numerical models and pre-gridded models as input for
LIME.

Using numerical input models
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Numerical input model can roughly be divided into two groups: those
where the model properties are described as cell averages and those
where the model properties are described at cell nodes (see figure). In
either case, LIME will send a coordinate to the model functions and
expect a value back. It is the up to the user to write an interface that
will look up the appropriate return value.

In the simplest case where the numerical model is described as cell
averaged values, the user needs to loop through the cells and find the
cell in which the LIME point falls and return the value of that
particular cell. In the case where the model is described on cell nodes,
the user must loop through the nodes to find the node which lies closest
to the LIME point and return that node value. This approach obviously
limits the LIME model smoothness to the input model resolution since all
LIME points which falls with an input model grid cell (or within a
certain distance from a grid node) gets the same value. One way to get
around this is to interpolate in the input grid, which in principle can
be done in either case, although this may be highly non-trivial if the
model is described on unstructured grid nodes or is of a dimensionality
greater than one. An example of linear interpolation in a one
dimensional table can be found in the example model.c file below.

In the special case where the input model is described on unstructured
grid nodes (e.g., Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics simulations) the input
grid can be used directly in LIME. This requires the user to set the
par->pregrid parameter.

If the user is more comfortable writing code in the FORTRAN language, it
is possible to use the model subroutines as wrappers to call FORTRAN
functions which then carries out any necessary calculations and return
the values to model.c. This can be done the following way:

.. code:: c

    void
    density(double x, double y, double z, double *density){
      fortransub_(&x, &y, &z, &density[0]);
    }

.. code:: fortran

    SUBROUTINE fortransub(x,y,z,temp)
    DOUBLE x,y,z,temp
    temp=f(x,y,z)
    RETURN
    END

In order for this to work the file containing the FORTRAN function needs
to be compiled by a FORTRAN compiler and the resulting object file needs
to be linked with LIME. This only works if the linking is also done with
the FORTRAN compiler, so some modification to the Makefile is needed.
Notice that the underscore after the name of the FORTRAN subroutine in
the C function call has to be present. Please note that the example
above is untested and may need modification in order to work.

If the input model file consist of a table of values, for instance as
when using the output of another code as input for LIME, the idea is
look up the input grid point (or cell) which is closest to the LIME grid
point in question (or for cell based tables, the cell in which the LIME
point falls). The way to deal with this is to make a column formatted
ascii file with the input model:

::

    x_1 y_1 z_1   density_1   temperature_1   any_other_stuff_1   ...
    x_2 y_2 z_2   density_2   temperature_2   any_other_stuff_2   ...
    ...
    x_n y_n z_n   density_n   temperature_n   any_other_stuff_n   ...

The idea is to find the i'th entry in that list where
minimum((x\_i-x)2+(y\_i-y)2+(z\_i-z)2) is true, or in other words which
entry in the list lies closest to a given LIME point (x,y,z). One way to
solve this would be as follows (example in pseudocode)

.. code:: c

    density(x,y,z){
     mindist=very_large_number
     open("model_input_file",read)
     while not end-of-file{
       read_one_line(x_i,y_i,z_i,density_i,...)
       calculate distance from (x,y,z) to (x_i,y_i,z_i) == dist
       if dist < mindist then {
         mindist = dist
         bestdensity = density_i
       }
     }
     close(file)
     return bestdensity
    }

and similarly for the temperature and other properties. This is
potentially a slow process, opening and closing a file for every grid
point. To speed up the process, it is useful to make the model columns
available as arrays in model.c. This can be done by formatting the
columns using proper C-syntax as arrays and putting them in a “header”
file that can be included in model.c

.. code:: c

    int size=numer_of_lines_in_model_file;
    double model_x[size]={x1,x2,...,xn};
    double model_y[size]={y1,y2,...,yn};
    double model_z[size]={z1,z2,...,zn};
    double model_density[size]={density1,density2,...,densityn};
    ...

The pseudocode example from above now reads:

.. code:: c

    density(x,y,z){
     mindist=very_large_number
     for i from 0 to size by 1
       calculate distance from (x,y,z) to (model_x[i],model_y[i],model_z[i]) == dist
       if dist < mindist then {
         mindist = dist
         bestdensity = model_densiy[i]
       }
     }
     return bestdensity
    }

RATRAN models as input for LIME
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is possible to use existing 1D or 2D model files from the RATRAN code
in LIME. This is done with ratranInput() subroutine. The .mdl file has
to comply with the RATRAN standard and the header (everything above the
@ sign) of the file needs to be intact. The functions in model.c look
like this

.. code:: c

    void
    density(double x, double y, double z, double *density){
      density[0]=ratranInput("model.mdl", "nh", x,y,z)*1e6;
    }

and

::

    void
    teperature(double x, double y, double z, double *temperature){
      temperature[0]=ratranInput("model.mdl", "te", x,y,z);
    }

for the density and temperature respectively. Notice that the density is
multiplied by 1e6 to convert the cgs units from RATRAN into LIMEs SI
units. The calls to the subroutine for the doppler velocity, systemic
velocity, dust temperature, and abundance are similar, using the
appropriate keywords to identify the column in the RATRAN .mdl file.
Since RATRAN uses molecular density and not abundance, the abundance
function should read

.. code:: c

    void
    abundance(double x, double y, double z, double *abundance){
      abundance[0]=ratranInput("model.mdl","nh",x,y,z)/ratranInput("model.mdl","nm", x,y,z);
    }

Obviously it is possible to mix RATRAN input, that is, using different
.mdl files for the different functions. All parameters in model.c still
need to be set, ie., par->radius, even though this information is
contained in the RATRAN header. If the RATRAN grid is not
logarithmically spaced, it may be advantageous to set par->sampling=1.

Example model file
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here follows the model.c file that can be found in the example directory
in the LimePackage. This model describes a simple spherical envelope of
HCO+ gas. The temperature is also one dimensional, but provided as a
table of value. The additional code in the temperature subroutine
interpolates the values of the table. A constant molecular abundance and
Doppler b- parameter is used. The velocity field is described by a
free-fall on radial trajectories toward a central mass of one Solar
mass. This example will produce a single image of the HCO+ J=4-3 line in
the approximate distance of the Taurus star forming region, using
Kelvins as the unit.

.. code:: c

    #include "lime.h"

    void
    input(inputPars *par, image *img){
      par->radius       = 2000*AU;
      par->minScale     = 0.5*AU;
      par->pIntensity       = 4000;
      par->sinkPoints       = 3000;
      par->dust     = "jena_thin_e6.tab";
      par->moldatfile[0]    = "hco+@xpol.dat";
      par->outputfile   = "populations.pop";
      par->binoutputfile    = "restart.pop";
      par->gridfile     = "grid.vtk";

      img[0].nchan      = 60;
      img[0].velres     = 500.;
      img[0].trans      = 3;
      img[0].pxls       = 100
      img[0].imgres     = 0.1;
      img[0].theta      = 0.0;
      img[0].distance   = 140*PC;
      img[0].source_vel = 0;
      img[0].unit       = 0;
      img[0].filename   = "image0.fits";
    }

    void
    density(double x, double y, double z, double *density){
      double r;
      r=sqrt(x*x+y*y+z*z);
      density[0] = 1.5e6*pow(r/(300*AU),-1.5)*1e6;
    }

    void
    temperature(double x, double y, double z, double *temperature){
      int i,k,x0=0;
      double r;
      double temp[2][10] = {
          {2.0e13, 5.0e13, 8.0e13, 1.1e14, 1.4e14, 1.7e14, 2.0e14, 2.3e14, 2.6e14, 2.9e14},
          {44.777, 31.037, 25.718, 22.642, 20.560, 19.023, 17.826, 16.857, 16.050, 15.364}
      };
      r=sqrt(x*x+y*y+z*z);
      if(r > temp[0][0] && r<temp[0][9]){
        for(i=0;i<9;i++){
          if(r>temp[0][i] && r<temp[0][i+1]) x0=i;
        }
      }
      if(r<temp[0][0])
        temperature[0]=temp[1][0];
      else if (r>temp[0][9])
        temperature[0]=temp[1][9];
      else
        temperature[0]=temp[1][x0]+(r-temp[0][x0])*(temp[1][x0+1]-temp[1][x0])/(temp[0][x0+1]-temp[0][x0]);
    }

    void
    abundance(double x, double y, double z, double *abundance){
      abundance[0] = 1.e-9;
    }

    void
    doppler(double x, double y, double z, double *doppler){
      *doppler = 200.;
    }

    void
    velocity(double x, double y, double z, double *vel){
      double R, phi,r,theta;
      R=sqrt(x*x+y*y+z*z);
      theta=atan2(sqrt(x*x+y*y),z);
      phi=atan2(y,x);
      r=-sqrt(2*6.67e-11*1.989e30/R);
      vel[0]=r*sin(theta)*cos(phi);
      vel[1]=r*sin(theta)*sin(phi);
      vel[2]=r*cos(theta);
    }


Output from LIME
----------------

Besides the FITS images, which are the main output, LIME produces other
output that can be used not only for diagnostics but also science
results. This chapter describes the various output files and how to work
with them.

The grid
~~~~~~~~

Once the Delaunay grid has been created by LIME, a VTK file with the
grid and grid properties are written (if the parameter par->gridfile is
set, see chapter 2). The VTK (Visualization Tool Kit) format is a
formatted ascii file that are used to handle geometrical objects, in our
case an unstructured grid. VTK files can be read by several
visualization software packages. In particular we advocate the use of
paraview (http://www.paraview.org) which is an open source program
available for several platforms.

The grid file contains the (x,y,z)-coordinate of each grid point, as
well as a reference to the neighbors of each grid point. From this
information the Delaunay triangulation can be reconstructed. The file
also holds three scalar fields and a vector field for the H2 density,
temperature, molecular density and the velocity field. Other properties
could be written out as well, but that will require the user to edit the
write\_VTK\_unstructured\_Points() function in grid.c.

Inspecting the grid using paraview can be a useful way to make sure that
the model indeed behaves as expected. It makes for impressive
visualizations that can be included in presentations. However, paraview
does a poor job when it comes to publication quality plots.

Populations
~~~~~~~~~~~

The level populations are written out in a separate file if LIME is set
up to calculate the level populations, that is, if at least one
molecular data file is defined in model.c (and if the parameter
par->outputfile is set). Currently, LIME can only write out populations
from the first molecule (par->moldatfile[0]). The populations output
file contains the x, y, and z coordinates for each grid point as well as
the H2 density, temperature, and molecular density besides the level
populations. Contrary to the grid file, it does not, however, contain
information about the neighbors of the grid points and therefore, the
Delaunay triangulation cannot be reconstructed from this file (unless
the points are re-triangulated with qhull or a similar tool). The
information in the population file allows the user to plot projections
and slices of the model properties including the populations. This is
the best way to directly compare the LIME model and the result of the
excitation calculation with the results obtained by other codes. One
particularly interesting property to plot is the excitation temperature

.. math::

    \frac{n_u}{n_l} = \frac{g_u}{g_l} \, \mathrm{exp} \left( -
    \frac{\Delta E}{k_B \, T_{ex}} \right)

which is obtained from the level populations. u and l refers to the
upper and lower level and g are the statistical weights. Calculating the
excitation temperature is the best way to check for masering in the
model since the excitation temperature turns negative in the case of
population inversion. If, and only if, the gas is in local thermodynamic
equilibrium (LTE) the excitation temperature equals the kinetic
temperature, so plotting the ratio of kinetic gas temperature to the
excitation temperature gives a measure of the deviation from LTE.

Images
~~~~~~

Image cubes are the main output from LIME. LIME produces model images in
the FITS file format only.

Post-processing
---------------

In order to make direct comparisons between LIME models and
observations, some kind of post-processing of the images will be needed
in almost all cases. In this chapter we will give some hints and tricks
to how this can be done using readily available software packages.

Convolution
~~~~~~~~~~~

In order to compare LIME results to single dish observations, the image
cube needs to be convolved with a beam profile that corresponds to the
instrument beam at the frequency in question. Before convolving am image
it is important to make sure that the image is larger that the beam size
and that the beam is resolved by the pixels (pixel size << beam size).
The reason that the image needs to be bigger that the beam is to avoid
artificial edge effects at the corners of the image. This is not very
important if only the spectrum toward the center of the image is of
interest, but if the image is being used as a model of a single dish
map, edge effects become important. In general, it is recommended that
the image is made large enough that the emission has dropped
sufficiently close to zero at the edges of the image.

If the beam size is small, it may be an issue that the beam is not
sufficiently resolved by pixels.This is important to make sure that
structures that are picked up by the telescope beam is sufficiently
sampled by the ray-tracer in LIME. In general it is a good idea to
calculate the image in a considerably higher resolution than what is
needed, because artifacts in the image that are due to the randomness of
the grid are then smoothed out. In order to compare a convolved model
spectrum to a single observed spectrum toward the source center, the
spectrum at the center pixel should be used without additional averaging
of pixels.

When comparing model images to interferometric observations, there is no
need to convolve the image with a beam profile. In this case, model and
data is compared in frequency space in which case the model image needs
to be Fourier transformed or in image space in which case the model
should be sampled with the (u,v)-spacing from the dataset and inverted
and cleaned using the same process as the observed data has gone
through. When Fourier transforming the model image, one should be
careful to avoid aliasing effects that are caused by the regularity of
the pixel grid. Such effects are model dependent and difficult to
prevent entirely. On the other hand, comparing the model to
interferometric data in image space is dangerous as well, because of the
non-uniqueness of the de-convolved image.

Both convolution and Fourier transforming can be done using the MIRIAD
tasks convolve and fft after converting the FITS file into MIRIAD format
using the MIRIAD task fits. Both convolution and Fourier transformation
can be done in IDL or Python.

Plotting the model
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The LIME data cubes can be visualized in numerous ways, both in one and
two dimensions. One dimensional plots include the spectrum of a single
pixel and the brightness profile along either spatial direction a a
specific frequency or summed over a range of frequencies. The two
dimensional (contour) plots are images when done in the plane spanned by
the two spatial axis, and position-velocity (PV) diagrams when done in
the frequency and any one of the spatial axis.

When plotting images, it is often useful to sum over a range of
frequencies. This results in, what is know as, moment maps. These can be
made to any order, but zero and first moments are most often used. The
nth moment is defined as

.. math::

    \mu_n \left( x , y \right) = \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \left( v -
    v_\mathrm{source} \right)^n \, I \left( x , y , z \right) \, dv

Sometimes the first moment (and also higher order moments) is normalized
by the zero moment.

Ideas for LIME 2.0
------------------

In the following we list a number of new features which are being
considered for the next major release of LIME. Users should feel free to
contact the maintainers with suggestions, improvements, new functionalities
or bugs needing to be fixed.

-  Line polarization
-  Visibility output
-  Tau images
-  User-defined, function based grid sample weights
-  Basecol/Vamdc support
-  etc...

Appendix: Bibliography
----------------------

-  Brinch & Hogerheijde, A&A, 523, A25, 2010; see also
   http://www.nbi.dk/~brinch/lime.php
-  Hogerheijde & van der Tak, A&A, 362,697, 2000
-  Ritzerveld & Icke, PhysRevE, 74, 26704, 2006
-  Ossenkopf & Henning, A&A, 291, 943, 1994
-  Kernighan & Ritchie, “The C Programming Language 2nd ed.”, Prentice
   Hall, 1988, ISBN-13: 978-0131103627
-  Padovani et al., A&A, 543, A16, 2012

